Hello I'm Professor Brian Bushee.
Welcome back.
In this video we're going to continue our
look at Discretionary Expenditure Models.
I'm going to introduce two
refinements that will help us better
use these models to detect
earnings management.
One will be something called the Distance
Measure, which will help us understand
a manager's motives to manipulate
earnings using a given expenditure.
And second, we'll look at
Quarterly Changes in the expenditures,
to help us find Earnings Management.
Once we go over those refinements,
I've got three brief cases to show
you how all this stuff will work.
Let's get started.
So we need to do some refinements to the
discretionary expenditure models because
they are very imprecise.
We still haven't addressed the problem
that the Economics of the firm may have
shifted which warrants a legitimate
change in expenditures
making it harder to spot manipulation
using discretionary expenditures.
So our first refinement is we're
gonna come up with something called
a Distance Measure and
I'll show you that in a little bit.
But this distance measure
will help us identify
companies' earnings management
motives during the year.
So one type of company that distance
measure will help us identify
is a company that would miss its earnings
target without a cut in expenditures.
For example, unless they cut
their R&D expense by say 2%,
they won't meet their earnings target.
We're gonna call these Meet or
Beat firms, so
their incentive is to cut their
expenditure just that little bit so
that they can meet or
beat their earnings target.
The distance measure will also
identify a company that would
miss its earnings target even
with a cut in expenditures.
So this means that if you cut
your R&D all the way to zero,
you would still miss your earnings target,
it wouldn't be a big enough savings in
expense to meet your earnings target,
we're gonna call these Big Bath firms.
Here the incentive is to increase
their expenditures to make a bad year
even worse, but save future expenses.
For example, if a company
accelerated its R&D spending, so
things they planned to spend on
next year it spent on it this year.
It would make its bad year even worse,
but it's still a bad year.
But what it would do is it would
help the recovery next year because
next years R&D expenses would be lower and
earnings higher because you've accelerated
some of those into the current period.
And the last group we can identify with
the distance measure would be a company
that would make an earnings target
even with an increase in expenditure.
So the company could
increase it's R&D by 3% and
still meet its earnings target,
even with the higher expense.
We're gonna call these smoothing firms.
Here the incentive is to increase your
expenditure to make a great year just
a good year and
again save future expenses.
So if you increase R&D from 3% to 5%,
it still allows you to make your
earnings target and what you've done
is you've saved some expenses in
the future, helping next year's results.
So that's what the Distance Measure's
gonna help us do.
The second refinement is to use quarterly
expenses to identify unusual changes
late in the year.
As we've talked about before,
normal business activities should cause
changes to happen throughout the year,
but earnings management
is more likely to cause the changes
to be concentrated late in the year,
when the manager realizes they need to
do something to manipulate earnings.
>> Another oxymoron?
I have been to Bath and
it is certainly not big!
>> This is not referring to Bath, England.
I've never been able to find a definitive
source for the origin of this term.
What I've heard is that it's
a reference to the fact that
companies used to write losses in red ink.
So profits would be written in black ink,
losses in red ink.
And so a loss meant the company was
taking a bath in red ink and so
a big loss would be a big bath in red ink.
So big bath means big loss.
I mean, whatever the origin,
it's become a well established term for
incentives to take a huge loss this period
in order to try to make your earnings
look better in future periods.
Let's take a look at how to
calculate the distance measure and
we'll look at R&D first.
So the Distance Measure = (Current
Pre-R&D Earnings- Prior Pre-R&D Earnings)
/ Prior R&D Expense.
When I say Pre-R&D Earnings,
what I mean is the Pre-tax Income.
Plus R&D expense, so we remove R&D
from Pre-tax Income to see what
the income would be without
any R&D spending, and
then you can also do this for
SG&A and advertising.
You just replace R&D
with one of those two.
So, here's an example
of how it's calculated.
Let's say, in 2014,
Pre-tax Income was 500,
2015 it's 505/ R&D Expense was 90 and
84 so
if we add Pre-tax Income and R&D Expense,
we get 590 in 2014 and 589 in 2015.
So the Distance Measure in this
case would be (589-590)
/ 90 = -0.011.
The way to interpret that is
the company would need to cut R&D by
1.1%, say from 90 to 89,
to equal last year's earnings.
And you can see this in the table.
If they had cut R&D from 90 to 89, their
pretax income would have been 500 and
they would have just met
last year's earnings.
Now as it turns out,
they cut R&D by more than that and
what it did was it allowed them to
take what would have been a decline in
Pre-R&D Earnings and turn it into
an increase in Pre-tax Income.
So the companies that we're
gonna look at as Meet and
Beat Incentives will be ones where
the distance measures between zero and
negative 0.20, or negative 20% or so.
Because in that case,
the company could cut r and
d enough to meet its earnings target.
>> I love the exacting
imprecision of -0.20 or so.
My sister says one should always
avoid strikingly soft demarcations.
>> [LAUGH] Exacting imprecision,
nice use of oxymoron again.
Yeah, so
I don't know where this cut-off is.
I do know that at some point
if a company cut too much R&D,
then they're destroying the company's
value because they could be sacrificing
investment in projects they need
to perform well in the future.
And if they cut too much, it's just gonna
simply be very noticeable to investors,
and they'll see right through it.
So I don't where the number is, it's
probably the case that some companies have
cut 25% to manage earnings, where as other
companies have needed to cut 15%, but
didn't because they
thought it was too large.
This is gonna be somewhere
in this neighborhood and
it's gonna be exactingly imprecise.
Anyway, a Big Bath incentive would be
indicated by a Distance Measure that's
less than -0.20 or so.
So less than 20%.
Cuz in that case the company could
really not feasibly cut enough R&D
to meet their earnings target.
Sure, they may be able to
cut 40% of their R&D or
80% of their R&D to meet the target.
But then that would also
be very obvious to people,
which would not make it a very effective
way to manipulate your earnings.
And finally, the Distance Measure will
indicate a smoothing incentive anytime
the Distance Measure's greater than zero,
cuz in that case,
the company could increase R&D and
still meet its earnings target.
Second refinement we're gonna look at are
Quarterly Changes in these expenditures.
Some firms report quarterly
amounts of expense.
I say some firms because
it's not mandatory.
It's essentially a voluntary disclosure.
To give you a sense of
how voluntary it is,
in 2015 about 95% of companies
reported quarterly SG&A because that's
somebody that all investors want to
see even though it's not required.
But 30% of companies
reported quarterly R&D and
nobody actually reported
quarterly advertising expense.
So we can't use it for advertising.
We're gonna look at our
year over year change or
YOY change, which would be the expense
this quarter minus the expense the same
quarter the last year divided by that
expense the same quarter the last year.
If discretionary expenditures are used
to manipulate annual earnings,
we would expect that the YOY
change in the 4th quarter
is different than the other 3 quarters.
So for the Meet and Beat incentive,
you would expect to see cuts in R&D in
the fourth quarter, as they try to meet
their target, whereas for Big Bath or
Smoothing incentives, you might see a big
increase in R&D in the fourth quarter,
as they realized they should
accelerate some of these expenditures
to make their earnings lower this year,
but help their earnings next year.
So we wanna look at the pattern of
quarterly changes in these expenses,
when available, in conjunction with
the discretionary expenditure measures and
the distance measure, to get the most
complete evidence on whether there might
be manipulation going on.
>> Can we make any definite
guesses about earnings management?
Based on whether companies
transparently hide their quarterly R&D?
>> Excellent question.
I think the big thing that determines
whether a company discloses quarterly R&D
or not is how important R&D is for
the company.
So companies where R&D is
a huge part of their business,
investors will demand the information
on a quarterly basis and
companies will provide it,
companies where R&D's not as important,
there's not as much demand to see
it quarterly and you won't see it.
Now if a company did start
disclosing a quarterly and
then stopped, that would be
very suspicious to investors.
They would try to figure out hey,
why are they taking away this disclosure.
And the inference would be that
maybe they are trying to manipulate.
So for that reason, if a company really
was trying to manipulate its R&D,
it would probably still
continue to disclose it, so
as to not raise immediate
suspicion as to what it's doing.
So, we tend to see the companies,
once they report quarterly R&D,
tend to always do it.
And so, we're gonna look at the quarterly
changes to try to make attributions
not whether they reported or not.
Now, we're gonna look at a number of cases
to illustrate how to use these tools.
And instead of making you wait
through all the data in a spreadsheet,
I pulled summaries into Power Point
to make it easy for us to look at.
The first case is a company
that had a possible meet or
beat incentive to manipulate
their expenditures.
And in each case, we're going to
look at research and development.
So this is Dog-Techno Corp.
In 2013 they had a negative
discretionary R&D measure.
Which was a bigger negative than in the
past, so that means they spent less on R&D
than expected, potentially cut
it to manipulate their earnings.
If we look at their distance measure,
it was a very James Bondian -0.007.
What that means is that
if they cut their R&D,
by just seven-tenths of a percent,
they would have reversed their
Pre-R&D earnings decline and made it
a positive change in pretax income.
So, they're very close to their target.
If we look at their quarterly changes
in R&D, you can see that the quarterly
changes get smaller each quarter, and then
are actually negative in quarter four,
suggesting a cut R&D relative to
the prior year in quarter four.
And in the last column is the change
in Pre-tax income divided by revenue,
just scaling it to make
it easy to look at.
So if this is positive, it means their
income was higher than last year, negative
means it's lower and, sure enough,
they meet their earnings target this year.
And this would be a pattern which
would suggest a cut in R&D in order to
meet your earnings target
from the prior year.
Second case is a possible
Big Bath situation.
This is Rexido Corp.
So if we look at their
discretionary R&D in 2007,
it was a big positive number,
much bigger than in the past.
Which means they spent
more on R&D than expected
which is gonna reduce their earnings.
If we look at their distance measure,
it was -0.634 which means they
would have to cut R&D by 63%
in order to meet their earnings target
which makes it a potential big bath.
And then we look at the quarterly changes,
the quarterly changes get bigger each
quarter and then it's an enormous 435%
increase in R&D in the fourth quarter.
And sure enough the last
column shows that they
missed their earnings target by a lot.
Their earnings were down by 13% of
revenue versus the prior year, so
this would be consistent with a Big Bath.
They knew they couldn't
meet last year's target.
So they accelerated some of next year's
R&D into this year to make the bad
year worse, but then hopefully help
their turnaround in the following year.
And then the last situation is
a potential Smoothing situation.
The company we're gonna
look at here is NDOGTHA.
They also had a big,
positive discretionary R&D in 2006,
indicating they spent more
on R&D than expected.
Their distance measure was 0.935,
which means they could increase their
R&D by 93% over the prior year.
And still have an increase in earnings.
When we look at the quarterly pattern,
we see a big increase in YoY R&D in
the forth quarter and in the last column,
they still did meet their earnings target.
They were 5.8% of revenue above
last year's Pre-tax income.
So this is consistent with smoothing where
they made a great year a good year by
accelerating some R&D expenses from last
year, next year into the fourth quarter of
this year to reduce earnings but then
save some expenditures for the future.
And that wraps up our look at
Discretionary Expenditure Models.
So you have another tool for your toolkit
in detecting earnings management.
In the next video we're gonna take
a different approach to trying to look for
manipulation.
We're gonna look at models that take
a look at firms that we know have
committed fraud.
Compare them to firms that
didn't commit fraud and
try to see what makes them different.
What makes them different are variables
that we could use to potentially
predict fraud.
I'll see you next time.
>> See you next video.